>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 7...
THE PRESIDENT EXPLAINS HIS
DECISION TO DELAY IMMIGRATION
REFORM.
FROM AFRICA, THE LATEST ON THE
ISLAMIC MILITANT GROUP BOKO
HARAM AND THE MISSING
SCHOOLGIRLS.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
FROM WEST VIRGINIA, RETHINKING
THE SCHOOL YEAR.
>> THEY GET SO MANY BREAKS THAT
THEY'RE ALWAYS REFRESHED AND
READY TO GO BACK TO SCHOOL.
SO THAT WAS THE WAKEUP CALL TO
ME.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE UNITED STATES HAS
INTENSIFIED ITS BOMBING CAMPAIGN
IN IRAQ AGAINST FIGHTERS FROM
THE ISLAMIC STATE EXTREMIST
GROUP.
THE PENTAGON SAID THE LATEST
ATTACKS OCCURRED LATE LAST NIGHT
ON SEVERAL MILITANT POSITIONS
NEAR THE HADITHA DAM, ABOUT 175
MILES FROM BAGHDAD.
AT A NEWS CONFERENCE TODAY,
DEFENSE SECRETARY CHUCK HAGEL
EXPLAINED THE RISKS OF
EXTREMISTS SEIZING OR DESTROYING
THE DAM.
>> THE DAMAGE THAT WOULD CAUSE
WOULD BE VERY SIGNIFICANT AND IT
WOULD PUT A SIGNIFICANT
ADDITIONAL AND BIG RISK INTO THE
MIX IN IRAQ.
>> Sreenivasan: ARAB FOREIGN
MINISTERS, MEETING IN CAIRO
TODAY BACKED A RESOLUTION
CALLING FOR ACTION AGAINST THE
EXTREMISTS IN IRAQ.
AND SEVERAL SENIOR MUSLIM
CLERICS HAVE NOW ISSUED FATWAS
AGAINST THE ISLAMIC STATE IN AN
EFFORT TO STOP YOUNG PEOPLE FROM
JOINING THE RADICAL GROUP.
THAT CEASEFIRE ANNOUNCED FRIDAY
IN EASTERN UKRAINE IS STARTING
TO COME APART.
VIOLENCE ERUPTED OVERNIGHT NEAR
THE CITIES OF DONETSK AND
MARIUPOL.
A WOMAN DIED AND FOUR PEOPLE
WERE INJURED IN THE LATEST
CLASHES BETWEEN PRO-RUSSIAN
SEPARATISTS AND UKRAINIAN
GOVERNMENT TROOPS.
REBELS SAID SEVERAL OF THEIR
FIGHTERS HAD BEEN KILLED AFTER
UKRAINIAN FORCES FIRED ON SIX OF
THEIR POSITIONS.
WE'LL HAVE MORE ON THE CRISIS IN
UKRAINE IN A MOMENT.
A 24-YEAR-OLD AMERICAN, MATTHEW
MILLER, WHO HAS BEEN DETAINED IN
NORTH KOREA SINCE APRIL, WILL BE
PUT ON TRIAL NEXT WEEKEND.
THIS ACCORDING TO NORTH KOREA
STATE MEDIA, WHICH DID NOT
SPECIFY THE CHARGES.
TWO OTHER AMERICANS ARE ALSO
BEING HELD THERE.
IN AFGHANISTAN TODAY, SEVEN MEN
WERE SENTENCED TO DEATH AFTER
THE ROBBERY AND GANG RAPE OF
FOUR AFGHAN WOMEN.
AN INCIDENT THAT PROVOKED
WIDESPREAD PROTESTS.
THE VICTIMS WERE DRIVING BACK
FROM A WEDDING LAST MONTH WHEN
THEY WERE STOPPED AND DRAGGED
OUT OF THEIR CARS BY THE MEN,
WHO WERE ARMED AND DRESSED AS
POLICE OFFICERS.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN IS
BELIEVED TO BE COMMONPLACE IN
AFGHANISTAN.
BUT TRIALS OF THIS SORT ARE VERY
UNUSUAL BECAUSE RAPE VICTIMS
OFTEN ARE CONSIDERED DISGRACED
AND TYPICALLY DON'T BRING
CHARGES.
IN AN INTERVIEW BROADCAST TODAY,
PRESIDENT OBAMA EXPLAINED HIS
DECISION TO POSTPONE EXECUTIVE
ACTION ON IMMIGRATION REFORM.
>> I'M BEING HONEST NOW ABOUT
THE POLITICS OF IT.
THIS PROBLEM WITH UNACCOMPANIED
CHILDREN THAT WE SAW A COUPLE
WEEKS AGO, WHERE YOU HAD, FROM
CENTRAL AMERICA, A SURGE OF KIDS
WHO WERE SHOWING UP AT THE
BORDER, GOT A LOT OF ATTENTION.
AND A LOT OF AMERICANS STARTED
THINKING, WE'VE GOT THIS
IMMIGRATION CRISIS ON OUR HANDS.
>> Sreenivasan: DEMOCRATIC
HISPANIC MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
CRITICIZED HIS DECISION.
>> I'M DEEPLY DISAPPOINTED THAT
THE PRESIDENT HASN'T ACTED WHERE
HOUSE REPUBLICANS HAVE FAILED TO
ACT.
>> IT'S CLEAR THAT PLAYING IT
SAFE IS WHAT IS GOING ON AT THE
WHITE HOUSE AND AMONG DEMOCRATIC
CIRCLES, AND PLAYING IT SAFE
MEANS WALKING AWAY FROM OUR
VALUES AND OUR PRINCIPLES.
>> Sreenivasan: POLICE FORCES
AROUND THE NATION ARE MORE
RACIALLY BALANCED NOW THAN A
GENERATION AGO.
THIS, ACCORDING TO AN ASSOCIATED
PRESS SURVEY CONDUCTED FOLLOWING
THE SHOOTING OF A BLACK TEENAGER
BY A WHITE POLICE OFFICER IN
FERGUSON, MISSOURI.
THE SURVEY SUGGESTS THAT MORE
PROGRESS HAS BEEN MADE HIRING
BLACK OFFICERS THAN HISPANIC
POLICEMEN.
SEVERAL OFFICIALS QUOTED BY THE
AP SAY THE HIRING OF MINORITY
POLICE OFFICERS DOESN'T
GUARANTEE AN END TO TOUGHER
POLICING OF MINORITY
COMMUNITIES.
AND A NEW SURVEY CONFIRMS WHAT
MOST SUNDAY TALK SHOW VIEWERS
LIKELY ALREADY SUSPECTED.
ARIZONA REPUBLICAN SENATOR JOHN
MCCAIN HAS BEEN THE MOST REGULAR
GUEST DURING THE PAST FIVE
YEARS, FOLLOWED BY SOUTH
CAROLINA REPUBLICAN SENATOR
LINDSEY GRAHAM, FORMER OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION STRATEGIST DAVID
AXELROD AND ILLINOIS DEMOCRAT
SENATOR RICHARD DURBIN.
THE 13 MOST FREQUENT GUESTS WERE
ALL MEN.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE ABOUT
THE SITUATION IN UKRAINE, WE ARE
JOINED NOW BY KIMBERLY MARTEN.
SHE IS A POLITICAL SCIENCE
PROFESSOR AT BARNARD COLLEGE AND
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY.
V AND SO PUTIN WAS ABLE TO SEND
IN FORCES RIGHT BEFORE THIS
CEASE-FIRE.
AND THEN CREATE THIS KIND OF
ALMOST NO MAN'S LAND AND THERE
WEREN'T ANY NEW ROUNDS OF
ECONOMIC SANCTIONS THIS WEEK.
SEEMS LIKE HE WAS IN A MUCH
BETTER POSITION COMING OUT OF
THAT.
>> I THINK EVERYONE REALIZES
THAT WHATEVER POLITICAL
SETTLEMENT IS GOING TO BE ONE
THAT FAVORS PUTIN'S INTERESTS.
-- RUSSIA HAS THE ABILITY TO
CONTROL AS A RESULT OF THE GAS
PIPELINE LINK.
>> FROZEN CONFLICT I MEAN IN THE
REGION IN GEORGIA, AND THEN IN
MOLDOVA, WE FOUND TRANSNISTRA
AND EASTERN UKRAINE AS THIS LONG
STANDING CONFLICT?
>> PEOPLE HAVE BEEN FEELING THAT
FOR THE LAST SEVERAL MONTHS THAT
THAT'S WHAT THE END RESULT IS
GOING TO BE IN PUTIN'S INTEREST
BECAUSE HE WOULD LIKE TO HAVE
MORE INTEREST IN UKRAINE, HE
WOULD LIKE TO HAVE UKRAINE
ALWAYS KNOCKED SLIGHTLY OFF
BALANCE SO THEY DON'T KNOW WHAT
HE'S GOING TO DO NEXT.
HE WOULD LIKE TO DEMONSTRATE
THAT HE HAS MORE POWER THAN THE
UKRAINIANS DO.
WHERE UKRAINE NEVER REALLY HAS A
DEFINITIVE SENSE OF SOVEREIGNTY
OVER ITS OWN TERRITORY.
THAT'S IN PUTIN'S INTEREST.
>> PUTIN HAS NO INCENTIVE TO
KEEP THIS IN STATUS QUO.
>> PROBABLY BEING BROKEN ON BOTH
SIDES, THE CEASE-FIRE AND THAT'S
NOT SURPRISING BECAUSE BOTH
SIDES REALLY HAVE AN INCENTIVE
TO TRY TO GET MORE FROM THE
MILITARY SITUATION BEFORE THEY
SIGN A FINAL PEACE AGREEMENT.
>> HAVE THE SANCTIONS CREATED
ANY KIND OF DISINCENTIVE OR
STRONG ENOUGH DISINCENTIVE FOR
PUTIN?
>> I DON'T THINK SO.
THE SANCTIONS PROBABLY WILL HAVE
LONG TERM NEGATIVE EFFECTS ON
THE RUSSIAN ECONOMY.
BUT THE GENERAL SENSE IS THE
SANCTIONS WERE PUT INTO PLACE
BECAUSE NOBODY COULD FIGURE
ANYTHING ELSE TO DO.
SHOWING THE UNITED STATES AND
ITS EUROPEAN ALLIES WERE ANGRY
AND NOT GOING TO LET THIS PASS
BUT HAVE VERY LITTLE ABILITY TO
INFLUENCE WHAT RUSSIA DOES.
>> EUROPEANS HAVE MORE TO LOSE
THAN UNITED STATES DOES.
>> YES,.
>> OBVIOUSLY HAS CRIMEA WHICH HE
DIDN'T HAVE BEFORE.
A COUPLE OF DAYS AGO IT IS NOT
GOING TO RECOGNIZE CRIMEA.
THE WEST NEEDS THE OIL FIELDS
AND AS LONG AS THERE'S NO
RECOGNITION IT DOESN'T BRING HIM
ANY ECONOMIC GAIN.
HE DOESN'T GAINING IN
ECONOMICALLY ON THIS.
IT IS MORE A GAIN OF WHAT HE CAN
SAY AS PRESIDENT AND SO PRETTY
MUCH MORE AN INDIVIDUAL GAIN FOR
PUTIN POLITICALLY THAN FOR
RUSSIA AS A STATE BECAUSE OVER
THE LONG TERM RUSSIA IS NOT
GOING TO PARTICULARLY BENEFIT
FOR THIS.
>> WHAT ABOUT THE RUSSIAN
TERRITORIES THAT ARE PART OF
NATO, HOW DO THEY SEE THIS?
>> THE OTHER MEMBERS, ESTONIA
LATVIA AND LITHUANIA HAVE BEEN
CONCERNED ABOUT THE POSSIBILITY
OF RUSSIAN AGGRESSION, AND
PUTIN'S AGGRESSION AGAINST
UKRAINE HAVE MADE NATO MORE
FOCUSED ON THOSE AREAS AND
DESIROUS OF SHOWING THAT THEY
ARE NATO MEMBER STATES THAT WILL
BE PROTECTED IN THIS CASE BY A
NEW RAPID RATIONS FORCE THAT
WILL BE A SUBGROUP OF NATO
MEMBER STATES THAT WILL ROTATE
AROUND THE TERRITORY AND BE
PREPARED TO RETALIATE IF
NECESSARY.
>> KIMBERLY MARTEN, FROM BAR
NARD UNIVERSITY, THANK YOU SO
MUCH FOR BEING ON.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME ON.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
IT'S EARLY SEPTEMBER, AND AFTER
THEIR LONG SUMMER BREAK,
MILLIONS OF CHILDREN AND
TEENAGERS ARE BACK IN THE
CLASSROOM FOR THE FIRST TIME IN
SEVERAL MONTHS.
BUT THAT'S NOT THE CASE FOR SOME
STUDENTS.
ABOUT 4% OF SCHOOLS ACROSS THE
NATION ARE ON A DIFFERENT
CALENDAR.
ONE THAT HAS THEM IN SCHOOL
YEAR-ROUND.
STUDENTS IN THOSE SCHOOLS GET A
MUCH SHORTER SUMMER VACATION,
BUT MORE BREAKS THROUGHOUT THE
YEAR.
DOES IT HELP LEARNING?
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
ALISON STEWART TRAVELED RECENTLY
TO CHARLESTON WEST VIRGINIA TO
TAKE A CLOSER LOOK.
HER REPORT IS PART OF THE
AMERICAN GRADUATE INITIATIVE.
>> Reporter: WHEN BRYAN AND
LAURA COOPER MOVED TO CHARLESTON
FROM BECKLEY, WEST VIRGINIA, TWO
YEARS AGO WITH THEIR YOUNG SONS,
THEY WERE APPREHENSIVE ABOUT THE
LOCAL SCHOOL IN THEIR NEW
NEIGHBORHOOD.
IT WAS ON A YEAR-ROUND CALENDAR,
WHERE KIDS START SCHOOL JUST
AFTER JULY 4.
>> IT SOUNDED TO ME LIKE THE
KIDS WERE IN SCHOOL CONSTANTLY,
YOU KNOW, WITH MAYBE JUST THREE-
DAY WEEKENDS HERE AND THERE.
>> I WANTED TO STAY AWAY FROM A
SCHOOL DISTRICT THAT INVOLVED
YEAR-ROUND.
>> Reporter: WHY DID YOU WANT TO
STAY AWAY?
>> I THOUGHT THE KIDS WOULDN'T
LIKE IT.
I THOUGHT THAT, YOU KNOW, ME
THINKING BACK AS A CHILD, I
THOUGHT, "MAN, I WOULD HAVE
HATED TO BE IN SCHOOL ALL YEAR
ROUND."
I WOULD HAVE MISSED SUMMER,
HANGING OUT WITH MY FRIENDS,
DOING THOSE ACTIVITIES
>> Reporter: BUT ONCE THE
COOPERS-- WHO BOTH WORK FULL-
TIME-- LEARNED MORE ABOUT THE
CALENDAR AT PIEDMONT ELEMENTARY
SCHOOL, THEY QUICKLY BECAME
CONVERTS.
HERE'S HOW THE SCHEDULE WORKS:
INSTEAD OF ONE EXTENDED SUMMER
BREAK, THE SAME 180 DAYS OF
SCHOOL ARE DIVIDED INTO 9 WEEK
QUARTERS, WHICH ARE THEN
FOLLOWED BY THREE WEEK BREAKS IN
FALL, WINTER, AND SPRING.
THERE'S ALSO ABOUT A MONTH OFF
FOR SUMMER.
IT'S SOMETIMES CALLED A MODIFIED
OR BALANCED CALENDAR.
AND HERE AT PIEDMONT ELEMENTARY
SCHOOL IN CHARLESTON, WEST
VIRGINIA YEAR-ROUND SCHOOLING
HAS BEEN THE NORM FOR ALMOST 20
YEARS.
>> ONCE WE GOT A SENSE OF WHAT
THE SCHEDULE ACTUALLY IS WE JUST
THOUGHT, "MAN, THAT'S GREAT."
WE CAN GO ON VACATION IN
SEPTEMBER INSTEAD OF IN THE
MIDDLE OF SUMMER.
>> THEY NEVER GET THAT FEELING
OF, "OH, I'M SO SICK OF BEING AT
SCHOOL," BECAUSE THEY GET SO
MANY BREAKS THAT THEY'RE ALWAYS
REFRESHED AND READY TO GO BACK
TO SCHOOL.
SO THAT WAS THE WAKEUP CALL TO
ME, TO SEE HOW DIFFERENT THEY
FELT ABOUT IT.
>> HI, HAVE A GOOD DAY.
>> Reporter: PRINCIPAL BETH
STURGILL IS A BIG BELIEVER.
SHE SAYS IN ADDITION TO
PREVENTING STUDENT AND TEACHER
BURNOUT, LESS TIME IS NEEDED FOR
RE-TEACHING AT THE BEGINNING OF
THE YEAR.
AND FOR PIEDMONT, WHICH IS A
DIVERSE INNER CITY SCHOOL WITH A
HIGH POVERTY RATE, HAVING
SHORTER BREAKS THROUGHOUT THE
YEAR CAN PROVIDE MORE STABILITY
FOR AT-RISK STUDENTS.
>> THERE'S LOTS OF FAMILIES THAT
SOMETIMES WE HAVE CONCERNS ABOUT
AND WE LIKE TO CHECK IN WITH AND
MAKE SURE EVERYTHING'S GOING
WELL.
AND JUST TO HAVE THAT CONSISTENT
FLOW WITHOUT HAVING THAT LONG,
SUMMER BREAK HELPS THEM.
>> Reporter: PRACTICALLY, THE
CALENDAR ALSO GIVES THE SCHOOL
FLEXIBILITY TO MAKE UP SNOW DAYS
DURING SPRING BREAK BEFORE
ANNUAL STANDARDIZED TESTING,
INSTEAD OF WAITING UNTIL THE END
OF THE YEAR.
>> I NEED EVERYBODY FACING ME
AND LISTENING.
>> Reporter: BUT THE BIGGEST
BENEFIT TO RUNNING ON A YEAR-
ROUND SCHEDULE ACCORDING TO
PRINCIPAL STURGILL AND OTHER
EDUCATORS WE SPOKE TO IS THE
POSSIBILITY OF ADDING MORE TIME
IN SCHOOL.
BY BRINGING KIDS BACK DURING THE
FIRST WEEK OF EACH THREE WEEK
BREAK.
IT'S CALLED INTERSESSION.
>> Reporter: WHAT IS
INTERSESSION?
WHAT'S ITS PURPOSE?
>> SO IT'S A VARIETY OF REVIEW
AND RE-TEACH FOR THOSE KIDS THAT
NEED IT.
A LITTLE, EXTRA BOOST AND IT'S
ALSO SOME ENRICHMENT ACTIVITIES
JUST TO GIVE THEM SOME FUN
THINGS TO DO.
>> Reporter: THE EXTRA WEEK IS
OPTIONAL AND PAID FOR AT
PIEDMONT USING FEDERAL MONEY
KNOWN AS TITLE ONE FUNDS, WHICH
ARE DESIGNATED FOR SCHOOLS WITH
HIGH POPULATIONS OF LOW-INCOME
STUDENTS.
THE COOPERS' KIDS, SEVEN-YEAR-
OLD ZENE AND NINE-YEAR-OLD
TAYAN, HAVE ALWAYS ATTENDED THE
INTERSESSIONS, WHICH ARE ALSO
WEEKS THAT THEIR PARENTS DON'T
HAVE TO WORRY ABOUT CHILD CARE.
>> FINDING CHILDCARE FOR THEM
FOR A WHOLE SUMMER IS A LOT
DIFFERENT THAN FINDING CHILDCARE
FOR THEM THREE WEEKS AT A TIME
THROUGHOUT THE YEAR.
>> IT MAKES FOR A VERY EXPENSIVE
SUMMER TO HAVE THREE ENTIRE
MONTHS STRAIGHT WHERE YOU'RE
PAYING FOR CHILD CARE.
>> Reporter: DESPITE THE
BENEFITS OF THE YEAR ROUND
CALENDAR THAT PARENTS AND
TEACHERS CITE, IT'S NOT CLEAR
THAT IT HAS HELPED PIEDMONT'S
ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE.
IN 2013, ONLY 38.1% OF CHILDREN
SCORED AT OR ABOVE MASTERY ON
READING.
AND ONLY 38.9% SCORED AT OR
ABOVE MASTERY AT MATH, BELOW THE
LEVELS FROM A DECADE AGO WHEN
THE STATE FIRST STARTED USING
THIS STANDARD TO EVALUATE
STUDENTS.
>> WHAT THE RESEARCH SUGGESTS
ABOUT THE ACTUAL POSITIVE EFFECT
IS THAT IF IT'S POSITIVE, IT'S
NOT GREAT OVERALL.
>> Reporter: HARRIS COOPER IS A
PROFESSOR OF PSYCHOLOGY AND
NEUROSCIENCE AT DUKE UNIVERSITY.
WHILE RESEARCH HAS DOCUMENTED
HOW LONG SUMMERS CAN CAUSE
STUDENTS TO LOSE, ON AVERAGE,
ONE MONTH OF INSTRUCTION, HE
SAYS SHIFTING AROUND THE
CALENDAR TO BE YEAR-ROUND IS NOT
A DEFINITIVE WAY TO INCREASE
STUDENT PERFORMANCE.
BUT WHERE IT HAS SHOWN AN IMPACT
HE SAYS IS WITH LOWER-INCOME
STUDENTS.
AND HE ALSO SUGGESTS THAT IT
COULD HELP CHILDREN WITH
LEARNING DISABILITIES, AND THOSE
FOR WHOM ENGLISH IS A SECOND
LANGUAGE.
BUT COOPER CAUTIONS EVEN
PROGRAMS LIKE INTERSESSIONS THAT
CAN ADD EXTRA DAYS TO THE SCHOOL
YEAR ARE NOT NECESSARILY GOING
TO BOOST ACHIEVEMENT.
>> WE SHOULDN'T EVER LOSE SIGHT
OF THE FACT THAT TIME IN SCHOOL
IS A BLACK BOX.
WORKING WITH THE SCHOOL CALENDAR
CAN INFLUENCE A CHILD'S
LEARNING.
BUT WHAT'S MOST IMPORTANT IS HOW
YOU FILL THE TIME THAT THEY'RE
IN SCHOOL.
>> Reporter: PEOPLE ARE STUCK ON
TEST SCORES.
>> OH, THEY ARE.
YES.
THEY ARE.
>> Reporter: UNTIL A BALANCED
CALENDAR CAN SAY, LOOK, WE MAKE
TEST SCORES BETTER, YOU'RE GONNA
HAVE SOME RESISTANCE.
WHAT DO YOU THINK?
>> I THINK THAT'S A LEGITIMATE
COMMENT.
BUT CAN WE SAY THE TRADITIONAL
CALENDAR MAKES TEST SCORES
BETTER?
I DON'T KNOW.
I DON'T KNOW THAT THAT'S THE
CASE EITHER.
SO I THINK YOU NEED THE LOOK AT
THE WHOLE CHILD AND THE IMPACT
THAT YEAR-ROUND EDUCATION CAN
HAVE ON THE WHOLE CHILD, AND NOT
JUST DOES IT MAKE YOUR TEST
SCORES HIGHER.
>> Reporter: IN WEST VIRGINIA
THERE IS ONLY ONE OTHER SCHOOL
USING A YEAR-ROUND CALENDAR,
MARY C. SNOW WEST SIDE
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL, ACROSS TOWN
FROM PIEDMONT.
THERE, ADMINISTRATORS ARE
EXPERIMENTING WITH TWO WEEK
INTERSESSIONS AND MAKING THE
EXTRA TIME MANDATORY.
AND AROUND THE STATE, YEAR-ROUND
SCHOOLS HAVE RECENTLY BECOME A
TOPIC OF DISCUSSION.
THIS FALL A NEW LAW WENT INTO
EFFECT THAT MANDATED 180 DAYS OF
SCHOOL, BUT GRANTED LOCAL SCHOOL
DISTRICTS MORE FLEXIBILITY ABOUT
HOW TO SET THE CALENDAR, SO THAT
IF A DISTRICT WANTED TO ADOPT
YEAR ROUND SCHOOLING IT COULD.
BUT NOT ONE DID.
>> I THINK PEOPLE ARE REALLY
SAYING OUT LOUD, SHOW ME HOW
THIS IS GONNA HELP MY SCHOOL
SYSTEM AND THE STUDENTS IN OUR
SCHOOL SYSTEM.
>> Reporter: CHRISTINE CAMPBELL
IS THE PRESIDENT OF THE AMERICAN
FEDERATION OF TEACHERS FOR WEST
VIRGINIA, A TEACHERS UNION.
AND SHE'S NOT SOLD ON THE IDEA.
IN ADDITION TO THE NEW STATE LAW
GRANTING SCHOOL DISTRICTS MORE
OPTIONS ON THE CALENDAR, SHE
SAYS SCHOOLS IN WEST VIRGINIA
ARE IN THE MIDST OF OTHER MAJOR
REFORMS: IMPLEMENTING COMMON
CORE, NEW STATEWIDE TESTING, AND
A NEW TEACHER EVALUATION SYSTEM.
>> I THINK PEOPLE ARE
OVERWHELMED WITH ALL THE OTHER
CHANGES THAT THEY'RE JUST NOT
READY TO TAKE ON THAT THAT MUCH
CHANGE OR ONE MORE THING UNTIL
THEY-WE-- WRAP OUR ARMS AROUND
ALL THE OTHER THINGS THAT ARE
HAPPENING IN THE STATE AND THE
EDUCATION SYSTEM.
>> Reporter: WHILE CAMPBELL
ACKNOWLEDGES THAT DISTRICTS
SHOULD HAVE THE FLEXIBILITY TO
TRY A YEAR-ROUND CALENDAR IF
THEY WANT, SHE SAYS THERE ARE
LOGISTICAL COMPLICATIONS SUCH AS
LACK OF AIR CONDITIONING IN MANY
SCHOOLS AND SCHEDULING ISSUES
FOR OLDER STUDENTS.
>> SPORTS IS A HUGE THING WHEN
YOU TALK ABOUT A BALANCED
CALENDAR BECAUSE IF YOU HAVE ONE
COUNTY THAT IS, YOU KNOW, IN THE
SYSTEM, THEY ALL PLAY EACH OTHER
IN THEIR SPORTING EVENTS.
SO WHAT DOES THAT LOOK LIKE WHEN
YOU GO FROM THIS COUNTY TO PLAY
THIS COUNTY AND THEIR CALENDAR
IS COMPLETELY DIFFERENT?
>> Reporter: SO FOR PEOPLE WHO
SAY, "SPORTS WILL ADJUST," YOU
HAVE TO THINK ABOUT IT BIGGER
THAN JUST-- IT'S NOT JUST
SPORTS.
IT'S THE SOCIAL ASPECT...
>> I MEAN, THAT'S PART OF...
>> Reporter: AND THE IMPORTANCE
OF...
>> ...A CHILD'S DEVELOPMENT IS
BEING INVOLVED IN THOSE THINGS.
AND IT'S A BIG PART OF OUR
CULTURE.
LET'S BE REALISTIC HERE.
>> Reporter: SHE IS ALSO
CONCERNED YEAR-ROUND SCHOOL
WOULD MEAN SERVICE PERSONNEL AND
TEACHERS WOULD BE UNABLE TO KEEP
SECOND JOBS, A NECESSITY FOR
MANY IN WEST VIRGINIA, WHICH
RANKS 47th IN THE COUNTRY IN
TEACHER PAY.
BUT ONE OF THE BIGGEST ISSUES IS
THAT PROVIDING PROGRAMS LIKE
INTERSESSION COSTS MONEY, AND
DESPITE FEDERAL FUNDING FOR SOME
LOWER INCOME SCHOOLS, IT'S NOT
ALWAYS CLEAR WHO WOULD HAVE TO
FOOT THE BILL.
>> DOES THE COMMUNITY HAVE TO
PROVIDE THOSE SERVICES?
IS THE STATE DEPARTMENT GOING TO
PROVIDE SERVICES FOR THE
INTERCESSIONS?
IF WE'RE GONNA TALK TO.. TALK
ABOUT HOW TO BRIDGE THAT GAP IN
STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT, WHAT DOES
THAT LOOK LIKE?
>> Reporter: FOR THE COOPERS,
THE LACK OF YEAR-ROUND OPTIONS
FOR OLDER KIDS IS A BIG CONCERN.
IN CHARLESTON THERE'S NOT A
SINGLE MIDDLE OR HIGH SCHOOL ON
A BALANCED CALENDAR.
IS THERE GOING TO BE A PERIOD
FOR YOU GUYS WHEN ONE OF YOUR
KIDS IS IN A TRADITIONAL SCHOOL
AND ONE IS ON THIS "BALANCED
CALENDAR"?
>> YEAH.
I DREAD IT.
AND I'M VERY CURIOUS TO SEE HOW
THAT'S GONNA WORK OUT.
>> Reporter: WHAT ARE YOU
CONCERNED ABOUT?
>> I JUST... TAYAN WILL HAVE
DAYS THAT HE HAS TO SCHOOL THAT
ZENE DOESN'T.
ZENE'LL HAVE DAYS OFF THAT TAYAN
HAS TO GO TO SCHOOL.
SO I'M SURE THERE'LL BE, YOU
KNOW, ANIMOSITY BOTH WAYS OF WHO
GETS TO DO WHAT.
>> Reporter: ONE OF THE CONCERNS
WE HEARD FROM PARENTS WAS THAT
THERE'S NO MIDDLE SCHOOL TO GO
TO...
>> YES, CORRECT.
>> Reporter: ...ON THIS
CALENDAR.
THERE'S NO HIGH SCHOOL TO GO
TO...
>> RIGHT.
>> Reporter: ...ON THIS
CALENDAR.
WHAT DO YOU THINK ABOUT THAT?
>> WELL, I WOULD LOVE TO SEE...-
MY PERSONAL OPINION IS I WOULD
LOVE TO SEE ALL OF KANAWHA
COUNTY SCHOOLS GO TO THE YEAR-
ROUND CALENDAR.
>> Reporter: ALL OF THEM?
>> YES, I THINK IT WOULD BE VERY
BENEFICIAL FOR STUDENTS.
>> Reporter: FOR PIEDMONT
STUDENTS TAYAN AND ZENE COOPER,
THEIR FIRST BREAK WILL BE NEXT
WEEK.
>> ...ONE THING OF THIS YEAR'S
INTERCESSION...
>> Reporter: AND WHILE MANY
SCHOOLS ARE JUST GETTING
UNDERWAY; THEY'VE ALREADY GOT
NINE WEEKS OF LEARNING UNDER
THEIR BELTS.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW DID THE IDEA
OF SUMMER VACATION REALLY BEGIN?
JOIN US ONLINE AS NEWSHOUR
DEBUNKS A LONG-STANDING MYTH.
VISIT newshour.pbs.org.
>> Sreenivasan: WHILE THE
WORLD'S ATTENTION HAS BEEN
FOCUSED RECENTLY ON GAINS BY
ISLAMIC EXTREMISTS IN IRAQ,
ANOTHER RADICAL ISLAMIC GROUP,
BOKO HARAM, HAS BEEN LAUNCHING
NEW ATTACKS IN AFRICA.
TO UPDATE US ABOUT THAT, WE ARE
JOINED NOW VIA SKYPE FROM GHANA
BY DREW HINSHAW OF THE WALL
STREET JOURNAL.
SO DREW WE HEARD JUST YESTERDAY
AGAIN ABOUT MORE ATTACKS IN
PARTS OF NIGERIA.
YOU KNOW, INSTEAD OF THE HIT AND
RUN ATTACKS THAT WE'VE SEEN FROM
THESE GUYS BEFORE NOW THEY ARE
CAPTURING TERRITORY AND FLYING
THEIR FLAGS.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THAT'S RIGHT.
WHAT THEY'VE BEEN ABLE TO DO
HERE IS, IN AN ENTIRE COUNTRY
SIDE, THE VERY FAR NORTHEAST OF
NIGERIA SOME TOWN AFTER TOWN IS
ABANDONED.
BOKO HARAM IS ABLE TO DO THAT
CONSTANTLY LIKE YOU SAID
STARTING WITH HIT AND RUN
ATTACKS AND MOVING ENTIRE UNITS
INTO THESE TOWNS, SCARING PEOPLE
OIL OUT.
YOU HEAR OVER AND OVER AGAIN,
THE ONLY PEOPLE LEFT IN THE
TOWNS ARE BASICALLY THE ELDERLY
WHO DON'T REALLY WANT TO MOVE OR
CAN'T MOVE AND -- DON'T REALLY
POSE A THREAT NO BOKO HARAM.
THEY ARE RAISING THEIR FLAGS IN
SOME PLACES NOT ALL PLACES.
THEY AREN'T STICKING AROUND AND
GOVERNING LIKE YOU HAD IN
NORTHERN MALI.
THEY GO IN THE CAVES AND
MOUNTAINS AND FORESTS -- CAVES
AND MOUNTAINS AND FORESTS.
>> TO FORM ANOTHER CALIPHATE OR
A BOKO HARAM STATE IN AFRICA?
>> THAT'S RIGHT, THAT'S RIGHT.
PEOPLE CONSTANTLY MISREAD WHAT
BOKO HARAM IS ALL ABOUT.
I THINK THE GOVERNMENT STILL USE
THEM AS YOU KNOW AN ISLAMIC
INSURGENCY THAT IS BENT ON
DENYING THE PRESIDENT
REELECTION.
BOKO HARAM HAS DONE FOR YEARS
WHAT THEY WANT.
THEY WANT TO CREATE THIS ISLAMIC
KINGDOM IN THE NORTHEAST OF
NIGERIA.
PEOPLE DON'T TAKE THEM AT THEIR
WORD BUT THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT
THEY'RE GOING ABOUT AND DOING ON
THE UPDATE.
>> ANY UPDATE ON THE MISSING
GIRLS THAT CAPTURED WORLD'S
ATTENTION?
>> DID SPOT GROUP OF 70 GIRLS IN
ONE AREA.
AND 40 GIRLS IN ONE FIELD WHEN
THEY CAME BACK THEY WERE GONE
AGAIN.
IT'S IMPORTANT TO SAY THIS.
BOKO HARAM HAS KIDNAPPED
HUNDREDS AND HUNDREDS OF GIRLS,
NOT JUST THOSE SCHOOL GIRLS AND
HUNDREDS AND HUNDREDS OF BOYS.
THEY WERE POLITICALLY IMPORTANT,
QUITE EARLY ON THEY HAD
SOMETHING THEY REALIZED WAS A
NEGOTIATING CHIP.
BOKO HARAM IS STILL HOLDING
THESE GIRLS AS A POTENTIAL
NEGOTIATING TOOL.
I TALKED TO OTHER GIRLS WHO WERE
KID MADAM, AND THOSE GIRLS,
SCHOOL GIRLS HAVEN'T BEEN GOOD
FOR ANYTHING YOU KNOW, THEY
HAVEN'T GOTTEN ANY POLITICAL
CONCESSIONS FROM THEM, THE GIRLS
THEMSELVES AREN'T MADE FOR LIFE
IN THE WORDS, YOU KNOW, IT'S A
BURDEN CARRYING AROUND HUNDREDS
OF TRAUMATIZED SCHOOL GIRLS FOR
BOKO HARAM.
SO BASICALLY THEY ARE IN A
STALEMATE.
THE GOVERNMENT CAN'T SEEM TO GET
THE GIRLS OUT AND BOKO HARAM
CAN'T GET ANYTHING FOR GIRLS
EITHER.
>> DREW IS HINSHAW, JOINING US
FROM ACCRA, GHANA, THANK YOU SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, TOO.
>> THIS
>> Sreenivasan: YOU MIGHT HAVE
HEARD A BIT EARLIER THIS WEEK
ABOUT A REMARKABLE DISCOVERY IN
ARGENTINA.
THE REMAINS OF A DINOSAUR THAT
LIVED NEARLY 80 MILLION YEARS
AGO AND WEIGHED MORE THAN A
BOEING 737.
IT TOOK YEARS TO UNEARTH ALL THE
REMAINS.
I.T.N.'s RICHARD PALLOT HAS THE
DETAILS.
>> IT IS THE MOST COMPLETE LARGE
DINOSAUR SKELETON EVERY FOUND.
SUCH AS THE SIZE IT TAKES A
SECOND TO COMPREHEND.
THIS IS ONLY PART OF ITS LEG.
THIS WAS A TOE.
SO THIS STARTS THE TAIL OF
DREADNAUGHTS.
>> THIS IS PART OF ITS 30 FOOT
TAIL.
THE DREADNAUGHTUS LIVED 70
MILLION YEARS AGO.
AND DESPITE ITS SIZE WAS A
HERBIVORE.
>> WHEN YOU'RE 65 TONS YOU'RE
NOT GOING TO REALLY HAVE ANY
ENEMIES.
AND THAT MADE ME THINK OF THE
OPPORTUNITY OF THE CENTURY
SHIPS, DREADNOUGHTS.
SO I THOUGHT DREADNAUGHTUS,
FEARS NOTHING.
>> THE DREADNAUGHTUS MEASURES IN
AT ROUGHLY THE SAME SIZE AS THE
30 METERS IN LENGTH WHICH
MARKS IT OUT AS ONE OF THE
LONGEST-EVER DINOSAURS.
IT IS ITS WEIGHT THAT SETS IT
APART.
IT'S ABOUT FOUR TIMES AS HEAVY.
SPENDS MOST OF ITS LIFE EATING
JUST TO KEEP ALIVE.
>> THE DIG IN ARGENTINA BEGAN
ALMOST A DECADE AGO, UNCOVERED
TWO DIFFERENT SPECIMENS, THE
LARGER OF WHICH MAY NOT HAVE
BEEN FULLY GROWN WHEN IT DIED.
A METER WIDE, PERFECT FOR
CLOBBERING ANY PREDATOR THAT
ATTACKS.
RICHARD PALLOT, ITN NEWS.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME LATE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
PALESTINIAN PROTESTERS CLASHED
IN EAST JERUSALEM.
A TEENAGER HAD BEEN WOUNDED BY
POLICE DURING AN EARLIER
INCIDENT.
BRUCE LEVENSON IS SURRENDERING
CONTROL OF THE ATLANTA HAWKS
AFTER ACKNOWLEDGING HE SENT A
RACIST EMAIL SAYING BLACK FANS
SCARED AWAY WHITES.
AND CELEBRITIES TURNED OUT FOR
THE FUNERAL OF JOAN RIVERS.
THE EVENT WAS CHARACTERIZED AS
SOMBER BUT FUNNY.
RIVERS ONCE DESCRIBED HER
FUNERAL WISHES: I DON'T WANT A
RABBI RAMBLING ON, I WANT MERYL
STREEP CRYING IN FIVE DIFFERENT
ACCENTS.
JOIN US ON AIR AND ONLINE
TOMORROW ON THE NEWSHOUR WHERE
WE WILL REPORT ON HOW FRACKING
IS FUELING A DEEP POLITICAL
DIVIDE IN COLORADO.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS WEEKEND AND
THIS EDITION OF PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND, I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.